---
layout: post
title: What '.' Means in R, and Why it Matters
category: programming
tags: [R]

---

As far as I can tell, the  R community has
no generally-accepted style
guide. [Google](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.xml) and
[Hadley Wickham](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/Style.html)
both have style guides, but across and even within CRAN packages,
different naming and spacing conventions abound. You're likely to find
variables named in camelCase, snake_case, or, interestingly, dot.case. This
last convention is unusual, because unlike many languages, R does
not enforce specific syntactic meaning for dots. Dots can denote
methods for S3 classes, but they don't have to. This means that R only
cares about dots *sometimes*, with confusing results.

S3 generic functions, like `print`, use the function `UseMethod` to
dispatch the appropriate method for the data type. The methods are
named using the construction `function.class` (i.e., `print.lm`,
`print.data.frame`). Sometimes you can even call the methods
directly, without the generic. For example:

    > print('hi')
    [1] "hi"
    > print.data.frame('hi')
    NULL
    <0 rows> (or 0-length row.names)

The character object `"hi"` isn't a `data.frame`, but R will try to
call it like a normal function anyway. S3 is very unstructured in this
way. The problem is that R can't always distinguish between
S3 generics/methods and dot case functions:

    > example <- function(x) print(mean(x))
    > example.two <- function(x) print(sum(x))
    > methods(example)
    [1] example.two
    see '?methods' for accessing help and source code
    Warning message:
    In .S3methods(generic.function, class, parent.frame()) :
    function 'example' appears not to be S3 generic; found functions that look like S3 methods 

Here I've defined two unrelated functions, but R isn't sure what to do
with them. `example` isn't an S3 generic, because I don't call
`UseMethod` to dispatch `example` methods for different classes, but
because of S3 naming structure, `example.two` looks like an S3 method
on the class `two`. S3 is so informal that there is no checking to
distinguish between the possibilites, and the `methods()` function
lists `example.two` as a method (although at least it warns you that
it's not sure).

This behavior is both unexpected and problematic. If you're relying on
a specific behavior from `methods()`, someone else's package (or your
own functions!) could give you unreliable results. There is no reason to
use dot case except as convention, and it's not a set convention, even
in base R. There are even base R functions that use a different case
for the function name and arguments (`colSums (x, na.rm = FALSE, dims
= 1)`)! I'd love to see an R overhaul, where a new R version is
released with a consistent style and an accompanying style guide. But until
that time, R users should at least stop using dot case.
